# Jake KMeans README

## How to Test (suggested)

Run the "TestJakeKMeans" script in matlab.
- Uses Iris dataset and an IMDB dataset

##  Functions and Scripts
### TestJakeKMeans
##### How To Run
type "TestJakeKMeans" in the MATLAB command line

##### What It Does
This script runs my KMeans classifier on the Iris dataset with 3 clusters, and runs my KMeans classifier on a large movie database for 1-10 clusters. The movie database file is very large, so allow about 5 minutes for this script to run. After execution, two figures will be created with the SSE of the clusters generated by my KMeans implementation and of those generated by MATLAB's built in KMeans funciton over the number of clusters.

---
### runJakeKMeans

#### How to Run
type "errors = runJakeKMeans(\<inputFile\>, \<k\>, \<outputFile\>)"

##### *Optional Parameters:*
**includePlots**:  a boolean flag that if set to true will generate 2d plots of the clustering
**FormatSpec**: For reading in complex data files. Default is set for reading the iris dataset.
 
 #### What It Does
This function classifies the data from the CSV input file into k clusters based on Manhattan distance. The cluster assignments and SSE are written to the output file.

---

### jakeKMeans
#### How to Run 
type "[ids, centers, squareError, errors ] = jakeKMeans(data,k)"

Data: 2d numerical array
K: number of clusters

**ids**: 1d array of cluster assignments
**centers**: 2d array of cluster centroids
**squareError**: SSE of final clustering
**errors**: 2d array of clustering SSE on each iteration

##### *Optional Parameters:*

***plotClusters**: Boolean flag that signal to generate a plot of the clusterings for each iteration of KMeans
 **plotCenters**: Boolean flag that signals to generate a plot of the centroids across iterations*

#### What it Does
This is my implementation of the KMeans algorithm. The algorithm first chooses k random points from the dataset to be starting centroids. The distance from each point to the closest centroid is calculated by Manhattan distance, and the points are labeled to their nearest centroid with the ids array. From here, the algorithm iteratively recalculates the centroid position by the average of all data points assigned to this centroid and then recalculates the nearest centroid for each data pont. This loop continues until there are no changes to cluster assignments between iterations.

---

### Other Functions and Scripts
##### loadDataScript - Script that loads complex data from movies_metadata.csv file
##### prepData - Script that removes unwanted data from movies_metadata.csv dataset
##### AnalyzeData - Script to compare the performance of jakeKMeans against Matlab's KMeans function.